#
#  Copyright 2009-2013 10gen, Inc.
#
#  Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
#  you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
#  You may obtain a copy of the License at
#
#  http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
#
#  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
#  distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
#  WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
#  See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
#  limitations under the License.
#


# PODNAME: MongoDB::DataTypes
# ABSTRACT: The data types used with MongoDB

=pod

=encoding UTF-8

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This goes over the types you can save to the database and use for queries in the
Perl driver.  If you are using another language, please refer to that language's
documentation (L<http://api.mongodb.org>).

=head1 NOTES FOR SQL PROGRAMMERS

=head2 You must query for data using the correct type.

For example, it is perfectly valid to have some records where the field "foo" is
123 (integer) and other records where "foo" is "123" (string).  Thus, you must
query for the correct type.  If you save C<{"foo" =E<gt> "123"}>, you cannot query
for it with C<{"foo" =E<gt> 123}>.  MongoDB is strict about types.

If the type of a field is ambiguous and important to your application, you
should document what you expect the application to send to the database and
convert your data to those types before sending.  There are some object-document
mappers that will enforce certain types for certain fields for you.

You generally shouldn't save numbers as strings, as they will behave like
strings (e.g., range queries won't work correctly) and the data will take up
more space.  If you set L<MongoDB::BSON/looks_like_number>, the driver will
automatically convert everything that looks like a number to a number before
sending it to the database.

Numbers are the only exception to the strict typing: all number types stored by
MongoDB (32-bit integers, 64-bit integers, 64-bit floating point numbers) will
match each other.

=head1 TYPES

=head2 Numbers

By default, numbers with a decimal point will be saved as doubles (64-bit).

=head3 32-bit Platforms

Numbers without decimal points will be saved as 32-bit integers.  To save a
number as a 64-bit integer, use bigint (i.e. L<Math::BigInt>):

    use bigint;

    $collection->insert({"user_id" => 28347197234178})

The driver will die if you try to insert a number beyond the signed 64-bit
range: -9,223,372,036,854,775,808 to +9,223,372,036,854,775,807.

Numbers that are saved as 64-bit integers will be decoded as
L<Math::BigInt> objects.

=head3 64-bit Platforms

Numbers without a decimal point will be saved and returned as 32-bit
integers if they will fit and 64-bit integers otherwise.

To force 64-bit encoding, use a L<Math::BigInt> object.

=head4 64-bit integers in the shell

The Mongo shell has one numeric type: the 8-byte float.  This means that it
cannot always represent an 8-byte integer exactly.  Thus, when you display a
64-bit integer in the shell, it will be wrapped in a subobject that indicates
it might be an approximate value.  For instance, if we run this Perl on a
64-bit machine:

    $coll->insert({_id => 1});

then look at it in the shell, we see:

    > db.whatever.findOne()
    {
        "_id" :
            {
                "floatApprox" : 1
            }
    }

This doesn't mean that we saved a float, it just means that the float value of
a 64-bit integer may not be exact.

=head3 Dealing with numbers and strings in Perl

Perl is very flexible about whether something is number or a string; it
generally infers the type from context.  Unfortunately, the driver doesn't have
any context when it has to choose how to serialize a variable.  Therefore, the
default behavior is to introspect the internal state of the variable.  Any
variable that has ever been used in a string context (e.g. printed,
compared with 'eq', matched with a regular expression, etc.) will be
serialized as a string.

    my $var = "4";
    # stored as the string "4"
    $collection->insert({myVar => $var});

    $var = int($var) if (int($var) eq $var);
    # stored as the int 4
    $collection->insert({myVar => $var});

Because of this, users often end up with more strings than they
wanted in their databases.

One technique to eliminate the string representation and store a numeric
interpretation is to add 0 to the variable:

    $collection->insert({myVar => 0 + $var});

If you would like to have everything that looks like a number saved as a
number without the C<0+> technique, use a L<MongoDB::BSON> codec that has
the L<prefer_numeric|MongoDB::BSON/prefer_numeric> option set.

    $coll2 = $collection->with_codec( prefer_numeric => 1 );
    $coll2->insert( {myVar => "1.23"} ); # stored as double 1.23

On the other hand, sometimes there is data that looks like a number but
should be saved as a string.  For example, suppose we were storing zip
codes.  If we wanted to be sure it is saved as a string, bless the string
as a C<MongoDB::BSON::String> type:

    my $z = "04101";
    my $zip = bless(\$z, "MongoDB::BSON::String");

    # zip is stored as "04101"
    $collection->insert({city => "Portland",
        zip => bless(\$zip, "MongoDB::BSON::String")});

Additionally, there are two utility functions, C<force_int> and
c<force_double>, to explicitly set Perl's internal type flags to
Integer (C<IV>) and Double (C<NV>) respectively, thus triggering
MongoDB's recognition of the values as Int32/Int64 (depending on the
platform) or Double:

    my $x = 1.0;
    MongoDB::force_int($x);
    $coll->insert({x => $x}); # Inserts an integer

    MongoDB::force_double($x);
    $coll->insert({x => $x}); # Inserts a double

=head2 Strings

All strings must be valid UTF-8 to be sent to the database.  If a string is not
valid, it will not be saved.  If you need to save a non-UTF-8 string, you can
save it as a binary blob (see the Binary Data section below).

All strings returned from the database have the UTF-8 flag set.

Unfortunately, due to Perl weirdness, UTF-8 is not very pretty.  For example,
suppose we have a UTF-8 string:

    my $str = 'Åland Islands';

Now, let's print it:

    print "$str\n";

You can see in the output:

    "\x{c5}land Islands"

Lovely, isn't it?  This is how Perl prints UTF-8.  To make it "pretty," there
are a couple options:

    my $pretty_str = utf8::encode($str);

This, unintuitively, clears the UTF-8 flag.

You can also just run

    binmode STDOUT, ':utf8';

and then the string (and all future UTF-8 strings) will print "correctly."

=head2 Arrays

Arrays must be saved as array references (C<\@foo>, not C<@foo>).

=head2 Embedded Documents

Embedded documents are of the same form as top-level documents: either hash
references or L<Tie::IxHash>s.

=head2 Dates

The L<DateTime>, L<Time::Moment> or L<DateTime::Tiny> packages can be used
to insert and query for dates. Dates stored in the database will be
returned as instances of one of these classes, depending on the C<dt_type>
setting of the L<MongoDB::BSON> codec object:

    $codec = MongoDB::BSON->new( dt_type => 'Time::Moment' );
    $client = MongoDB::MongoClient->new( bson_codec => $codec );

An example of storing and retrieving a date:

    use DateTime;

    my $now = DateTime->now;
    $collection->insert({'ts' => $now});

    my $obj = $collection->find_one;
    print "Today is ".$obj->{'ts'}->ymd."\n";

An example of querying for a range of dates:

    my $start = DateTime->from_epoch( epoch => 100000 );
    my $end = DateTime->from_epoch( epoch => 500000 );

    my $cursor = $collection->query({event => {'$gt' => $start, '$lt' => $end}});

B<Warning: creating Perl L<DateTime> objects is extremely slow.>  Consider
saving dates as epoch seconds and converting the numbers to objects only when
needed.  A single L<DateTime> field can make deserialization up to 10 times
slower.

For example, you could use the L<time> function to store seconds since the epoch:

    $collection->update($criteria, {'$set' => {"last modified" => time()}})

This will be B<MUCH> faster to deserialize.  Or, for more precision, consider
using the L<Time::HiRes time/Time::HiRes#time> function to get epoch
seconds as a floating-point value.

The L<Time::Moment> module is substantially faster than L<DateTime> and
might be a convenient alternative over using integers or floating point
numbers and manually inflating to an object before use.  Consider
benchmarking using C<dt_type> set to L<Time::Moment> against using numbers
and inflating on demand.

Note that (at least, as of C<DateTime::Tiny> version 1.04) there is no
time-zone attribute for C<DateTime::Tiny> objects.  We therefore
consider all such times to be in the C<UTC> time zone.  Likewise,
C<DateTime::Tiny> has no notion of milliseconds (yet?), so the
milliseconds portion of the datetime will be set to zero.

=head2 Regular Expressions

Use C<qr/.../> to use a regular expression in a query, but be sure to limit
your regular expression to syntax and features supported by PCRE, which are
L<not actually fully compatible with
Perl|https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perl_Compatible_Regular_Expressions#Differences_from_Perl>.

    my $cursor = $collection->query({"name" => qr/[Jj]oh?n/});

Regular expressions will match strings saved in the database.

B<NOTE>: only the following flags are supported: "imxs".

You can also save and retrieve regular expressions themselves, but
regular expressions will be retrieved as L<MongoDB::BSON::Regexp>
objects for safety (these will round-trip correctly).

From that object, you can attempt to compile a reference to a C<qr{}> using
the C<try_compile> method, though due to PCRE differences, this could fail
to compile or could have different match behavior than intended.

    $collection->insert({"regex" => qr/foo/i});
    $obj = $collection->find_one;
    if ("FOO" =~ $obj->{regex}->try_compile) { # matches
        print "hooray\n";
    }

B<SECURITY NOTE>: A regular expression can evaluate arbitrary code.  You
are strongly advised never to use untrusted input as a regular expression.

=head2 Booleans

Boolean values are emulated using the L<boolean> package via the
C<boolean::true> and C<boolean::false> functions.  Using L<boolean> objects
in documents will ensure the documents have the BSON boolean type in the
database.  Likewise, BSON boolean types in the database will be returned
as L<boolean> objects.

An example of inserting boolean values:

    use boolean;

    $collection->insert({"okay" => true, "name" => "fred"});

An example using boolean values for query operators (only returns documents
where the name field exists):

    my $cursor = $collection->query({"name" => {'$exists' => boolean::true}});

Most of the time, you can just use 1 or 0 in query operations instead of
C<true> and C<false>, such as for specifying fields to return, but some
commands require L<boolean> objects and the database will return an error
if integers 1 or 0 are used.

Boolean objects from the following JSON libraries will also be encoded
correctly in the database:

=for :list
* JSON::XS
* JSON::PP
* Cpanel::JSON::XS
* Mojo::JSON
* JSON::Tiny

=head2 MongoDB::OID

"OID" stands for "Object ID", and is a unique id to identify documents.
They are 12 bytes which are guaranteed to be unique.  Their string form is
a 24-character string of hexidecimal digits.

To create a unique id:

    my $oid = MongoDB::OID->new;

To create a MongoDB::OID from an existing 24-character hexidecimal string:

    my $oid = MongoDB::OID->new("value" => "123456789012345678901234");

=head2 Binary Data

By default, all database strings are UTF8.  To save images, binaries, and other
non-UTF8 data, you need to store it as binary data.  There are two ways to do this.

=head3 String Refs

In general, you can pass the string as a reference.  For example:

    # non-utf8 string
    my $string = "\xFF\xFE\xFF";

    $collection->insert({"photo" => \$string});

This will save the variable as binary data, bypassing the UTF8 check.

Binary data can be matched exactly by the database, so this query will match
the object we inserted above:

    $collection->find({"photo" => \$string});

=head3 L<MongoDB::BSON::Binary> type

You can also use the L<MongoDB::BSON::Binary> class.  This allows you to
preserve the I<subtype> of your data.  Binary data in MongoDB stores a "type"
field, which can be any integer between 0 and 255.  Identical data will only
match if the subtype is the same.

Perl uses the default subtype of C<SUBTYPE_GENERIC>.

The driver returns binary fields as instances of L<MongoDB::BSON::Binary>
to ensure that binary data can successfullly roundtrip.
L<MongoDB::BSON::Binary> object stringify to the underlying data to make it
easier to work with.

=head2 MongoDB::Code

L<MongoDB::Code> is used to represent JavaScript code and, optionally, scope.
To create one:

    use MongoDB::Code;

    my $code = MongoDB::Code->new("code" => "function() { return 'hello, world'; }");

Or, with a scope:

    my $code = MongoDB::Code->new("code" => "function() { return 'hello, '+name; }",
        "scope" => {"name" => "Fred"});

Which would then return "hello, Fred" when run.

=head2 MongoDB::MinKey

C<MongoDB::MinKey> is "less than" any other value of any type.  This can be useful
for always returning certain documents first (or last).

C<MongoDB::MinKey> has no methods, fields, or string form.  To create one, it is
sufficient to say:

    bless $minKey, "MongoDB::MinKey";

=head2 MongoDB::MaxKey

C<MongoDB::MaxKey> is "greater than" any other value of any type.  This can be useful
for always returning certain documents last (or first).

C<MongoDB::MaxKey> has no methods, fields, or string form.  To create one, it is
sufficient to say:

    bless $minKey, "MongoDB::MaxKey";

=head2 MongoDB::Timestamp

    my $ts = MongoDB::Timestamp->new({sec => $seconds, inc => $increment});

Timestamps are used internally by MongoDB's replication.  You can see them in
their natural habitat by querying C<local.main.$oplog>.  Each entry looks
something like:

    { "ts" : { "t" : 1278872990000, "i" : 1 }, "op" : "n", "ns" : "", "o" : { } }

In the shell, timestamps are shown in milliseconds, although they are stored as
seconds.  So, to represent this document in Perl, we would do:

    my $oplog = {
        "ts" => MongoDB::Timestamp->new("sec" => 1278872990, "inc" => 1),
        "op" => "n",
        "ns" => "",
        "o" => {}
    }

Timestamps are not dates.  You should not use them unless you are doing
something low-level with replication.  To save dates or times, use a number,
L<DateTime> object, or L<DateTime::Tiny> object.

# vim: set ts=4 sts=4 sw=4 et tw=75:
