#
#  Copyright 2015 MongoDB, Inc.
#
#  Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
#  you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
#  You may obtain a copy of the License at
#
#  http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
#
#  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
#  distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
#  WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
#  See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
#  limitations under the License.
#

# PODNAME: MongoDB::Upgrading
# ABSTRACT: Deprecations and behavior changes from the v0 driver

=pod

=head1 WORK-IN-PROGRESS

This document is a work in progress during the v1 development cycle.
It offers a best-efforts snapshot of changes at a point in time.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The v1 driver represents a substantial step forward in functionality and
consistency.  There are many areas where the old API has been deprecated or
changed in a backward breaking way.

This document is intended to help developers update their code to take into
account API changes from the v0 driver to the v1 driver.

=head1 RATIONALE

Changes to the driver were deemed necessary to achieve certain goals:

=for :list
* consistency (intra-driver) – many parts of the v0 API were inconsistent,
  behaving differently from method to method; the v1 API minimizes
  developer surprises by improving consistency in return types and
  exception types.
* consistency (inter-driver) — "next-generation" MongoDB drivers across
  all languages are converging on common APIs and common behaviors; this
  simplifies developer education and support, as cross-language examples
  will be similar.
* encapsulation – too many low-level, internal operations were exposed as
  part of the API, which complicates maintenance work; the v1 API aims to
  minimize the "public surface" available to developers.
* abstraction – many methods returned raw server documents for end-user
  code to inspect, which is brittle in the face of changes by the server
  over time; the v1 API uses objects to abstract the details behind
  standard method calls.
* compatibility – some new features or changes in the MongoDB server, like
  the client authentication model, no longer fit the old driver design.
* portability – the v0 driver had a large dependency tree and required a
  compiler and various libraries; the v1 driver removes some dependencies
  and uses widely-used CPAN modules in place of custom C code where
  possible.
* round-trippable data – the v0 BSON implementation could easily lead to
  data corruption when round-tripping documents; the v1 driver makes
  round-trippability a top priority, even if this means removing or
  changing how BSON encoding or decoding works

=head1 INSTALLATION AND DEPENDENCY CHANGES

=head2 SSL and SASL

The v0 driver required a compiler and OpenSSL and libgsasl for SSL and SASL
support, respectively.  The v1 driver instead relies on CPAN modules
C<IO::Socket::SSL> and C<Authen::SASL> for SSL and SASL support,
respectively.

SSL configuration is now possible via the L<ssl
attribute|MongoDB::MongoClient/ssl>.

Authentication configuration is described in L<MongoDB::MongoClient/AUTHENTICATION>.

=head1 BEHAVIOR CHANGES

=head2 MongoClient configuration

=head3 New configuration options

Several configuration options have been added, with particular emphasis on
adding more granular control of timings and timeout behaviors.

=for :list
* C<auth_mechanism>
* C<auth_mechanism_properties>
* C<bson_codec>
* C<connect_timeout_ms>
* C<connect_type>
* C<heartbeat_frequency_ms>
* C<local_threshold_ms>
* C<max_time_ms>
* C<replica_set_name>
* C<read_pref_mode>
* C<read_pref_tag_sets>
* C<server_selection_timeout_ms>
* C<socket_check_interval_ms>
* C<socket_timeout_ms>

=head3 Configuration options changed to read-only

Configuration options are changing to be immutable to prevent surprising
action-at-a-distance.  (E.g. changing an attribute value in some part of
the code changes it for other parts of the code that didn't expect it.)
Going forward, options may be set at L<MongoDB::MongoClient> construction
time only.

The following options have changed to be read-only:

=for :list
* C<db_name>
* C<j>
* C<password>
* C<ssl>
* C<username>
* C<w>
* C<wtimeout>

Write concern may be overridden at the L<MongoDB::Database> and
L<MongoDB::Collection> level during construction of those objects.
For more details, see the later section on
L<write concern changes|/Write concern objects and removing the safe argument>.

=head3 Mapping between connection string and configuration options

Many configuration options may be set via a connection string URI in the
C<host> option.  In the v0 driver, the precedence between the connection
string and constructor options was completely inconsistent.  In the v1
driver, options set via a connection string URI will take precedence over
options passed to the constructor.  This is consistent with with other
MongoDB drivers (as well as how L<DBI> treats Data Source Names).

The list of servers and ports as well as the optional C<username>,
C<password> and C<db_name> options come directly from URI structure.  Other
options are parsed as key-value parameters at the end of the connection
string.  The following table shows how connection string keys map to
configuration options in the L<MongoDB::MongoClient>:

    Connection String Key           MongoClient option
    ---------------------------     -----------------------------
    authMechanism                   auth_mechanism
    authMechanismProperties         auth_mechanism_properties
    connect                         connect_type
    connectTimeoutMS                connect_timeout_ms
    heartbeatFrequencyMS            heartbeat_frequency_ms
    journal                         j
    localThresholdMS                local_threshold_ms
    maxTimeMS                       max_time_ms
    readPreference                  read_pref_mode
    readPreferenceTags              read_pref_tag_sets
    replicaSet                      replica_set_name
    serverSelectionTimeoutMS        server_selection_timeout_ms
    socketCheckIntervalMS           socket_check_interval_ms
    socketTimeoutMS                 socket_timeout_ms
    ssl                             ssl
    w                               w
    wTimeoutMS                      wtimeout

The C<readPreferenceTags> and C<authMechanismProperties> keys take
colon-delimited, comma-separated pairs:

    readPreferenceTags=dc:nyeast,rack:1
    authMechanismProperties=SERVICE_NAME:mongodb

The C<readPreferenceTags> option may be repeated to build up a list
of tag set documents:

    readPreferenceTags=dc:nyc,rack:1&readPreferenceTags=dc:nyc

=head3 Deprecated configuration options

Several options have been superseded, replaced or renamed for clarity and
are thus deprecated and undocumented.  They are kept for a limited degree
of backwards compatibility.  They will be generally be used as fallbacks
for other options.  If any were read-write, they have also been changed to
read-only.

=for :list
* C<dt_type> — see L</BSON encoding changes> for details.
* C<query_timeout> — replaced by C<socket_timeout_ms>; if set, this will be
  used as a fallback default for C<socket_timeout_ms>.
* C<sasl> — superseded by C<auth_mechanism>; if set, this will be used
  along with C<sasl_mechanism> as a fallback default for C<auth_mechanism>.
* C<sasl_mechanism> — superseded by C<auth_mechanism>; if set, this will be
  used as a fallback default for C<auth_mechanism>.
* C<timeout> — replaced by C<connect_timeout_ms>; if set, this will be used
  as a fallback default for C<connect_timeout_ms>.

These will be removed in a future major release.

=head3 Configuration options removed

Some configuration options have been removed entirely, as they no longer
serve any purpose given changes to server discovery, server selection and
connection handling:

=for :list
* C<auto_connect>
* C<auto_reconnect>
* C<find_master>
* C<max_bson_size>

As described further below in the L</BSON encoding changes> section, these
BSON encoding configuration options have been removed as well:

=for :list
* C<inflate_dbrefs>
* C<inflate_regexps>

Removed configuration options will be ignored if passed to the
L<MongoDB::MongoClient> constructor.

=head2 Lazy connections and reconnections on demand

The improved approach to server monitoring and selection allows all
connections to be lazy.  When the client is constructed, no connections are
made until the first network operation is needed.  At that time, the client
will scan all servers in the seed list and begin regular monitoring.
Connections that drop will be re-established when needed.

See L<SERVER SELECTION|MongoDB::MongoClient/SERVER SELECTION> and L<SERVER
MONITORING|MongoDB::MongoClient/SERVER MONITORING> in
L<MongoDB::MongoClient> for details.

=head2 Exceptions are the preferred error handling approach

In the v0 driver, errors could be indicated in various ways:

=for :list
* boolean return value
* string return value is an error; hash ref is success
* document that might contain an 'err', 'errmsg' or '$err' field
* thrown string exception

Regardless of the documented error handling, every method that involved a
network operation would throw an exception on various network errors.

In the v1 driver, exceptions objects are the standard way of indicating
errors.  The exception hierarchy is described in L<MongoDB::Error>.

=head2 Cursors and query responses

In v0, L<MongoDB::Cursor> objects were used for ordinary queries as well as
the query-like commands aggregation and parallel scan.  However, only
cursor iteration commands worked for aggregation and parallel scan
"cursors"; the rest of the L<MongoDB::Cursor> API didn't apply and was
fatal.

In v1, all result iteration is done via the new L<MongoDB::QueryResult>
class.  L<MongoDB::Cursor> is now just a thin wrapper that holds query
parameters, instantiates a L<MongoDB::QueryResult> on demand, and passes
iteration methods through to the query result object.

This significantly simplifies the code base and should have little end-user
visibility unless users are specifically checking the return type of
queries and query-like methods.

The C<explain> cursor method no longer resets the cursor.

The C<slave_ok> cursor method now sets the C<read_preference>
to 'secondaryPreferred' or clears it to 'primary'.

The C<snapshot> cursor method now requires a boolean argument, allowing
it to be turned on or off before executing the query.  Calling it without
an argument (as it was in v0) is a fatal exception.

Parallel scan "cursors" are now L<QueryResult> objects, with the same
iteration methods as in v0.

The C<$MongoDB::Cursor::slave_ok> global variable has been removed as part
of the revision to read preference handling.  See the L<read
preferences/Read preference objects and the read_preference method> section
below for more details.

The C<$MongoDB::Cursor::timeout> global variable has also been removed.
Timeouts are set during L<MongoDB::MongoClient> configuration and are
immutable.  See the section on L<configuration changes/MongoClient
configuration> for more.

=head2 Aggregation API

On MongoDB 2.6 or later, C<aggregate> always uses a cursor to execute
the query.  The C<batchSize> option has been added (but has no effect
prior to 2.6).  The C<cursor> option is deprecated.

The return types for the C<aggregate> method are now B<always>
L<QueryResult> objects, regardless of whether the aggregation uses a cursor
internally or is an 'explain'.

B<NOTE>: To help users with a 2.6 mongos and mixed version shards with
versions before 2.6, passing the deprecated 'cursor' option with a false
value will disable the use of a cursor.  This workaround is provided for
convenience and will be removed when 2.4 is no longer supported.

=head2 Read preference objects and the read_preference method

A new L<MongoDB::ReadPreference> class is used to encapsulate read
preference attributes.  In the v1 driver, it is constructed from the
C<read_pref_mode> and C<read_pref_tag_sets> attributes on L<MongoDB::MongoClient>:

    MongoDB::MongoClient->new(
        read_pref_mode => 'primaryPreferred',
        read_pref_tag_sets => [ { dc => 'useast' }, {} ],
    );

The old C<read_preference> method to change the read preference has been
removed and trying to set a read preference after the client has been
created is a fatal error.

The C<read_preference> method now returns the L<MongoDB::ReadPreference>
object generated from C<read_pref_mode> and C<read_pref_tag_sets>.

It is inherited by L<MongoDB::Database>, L<MongoDB::Collection>,
and L<MongoDB::GridFS> objects unless provided as an option to
the relevant factory methods:

    my $coll = $db->get_collection(
        "foo", { read_preference => 'secondary' }
    );

Such C<read_preference> arguments may be a L<MongoDB::ReadPreference>
object, a hash reference of arguments to construct one, or a string that
represents the read preference mode.

L<MongoDB::Database> and L<MongoDB::Collection> also have C<clone> methods
that allow easy alteration of a read preference for a limited scope.

    my $coll2 = $coll->clone( read_preference => 'secondaryPreferred' );

For L<MongoDB::Cursor>, the C<read_preference> method sets a hidden read
preference attribute that is used for the query in place of the
L<MongoDB::MongoClient> default C<read_preference> attribute.  This means
that calling C<read_preference> on a cursor object no longer changes the
read preference globally on the client – the read preference change is
scoped to the cursor object only.

=head2 Write concern objects and removing the safe argument

A new L<MongoDB::WriteConcern> class is used to encapsulate write concern
attributes.  In the v1 driver, it is constructed from the C<w>, C<wtimeout>
and C<j> attributes on L<MongoDB::MongoClient>:

    MongoDB::MongoClient->new( w => 'majority', wtimeout => 1000 );

The C<write_concern> method now returns the L<MongoDB::WriteConcern>
object generated from C<w>, C<wtimeout> and C<j>.

It is inherited by L<MongoDB::Database>, L<MongoDB::Collection>,
and L<MongoDB::GridFS> objects unless provided as an option to
the relevant factory methods:

    $db = $client->get_database(
        "test", { write_concern => { w => 'majority' } }
    );

Such C<write_concern> arguments may be a L<MongoDB::WriteConcern>
object, a hash reference of arguments to construct one, or a string that
represents the C<w> mode.

L<MongoDB::Database> and L<MongoDB::Collection> also have C<clone> methods
that allow easy alteration of a write concern for a limited scope.

    my $coll2 = $coll->clone( write_concern => { w => 1 } );

The C<safe> argument is no longer used in the new CRUD API.

=head2 Authentication based only on configuration options

Authentication now happens automatically on connection during the
"handshake" with any given server based on the L<auth_mechanism
attribute|MongoDB::MongoClient/auth_mechanism>.

The old C<authenticate> method in L<MongoDB::MongoClient> has been removed.

=head2 Bulk insertion

Insertion via the bulk API will B<NOT> insert an C<_id> into the original
document if one does not exist.  Previous documentation was not specific
whether this was the case or if the C<_id> was added only during BSON
encoding.

=head2 Bulk write results

The bulk write results class has been renamed to
L<MongoDB::BulkWriteResult>.  It keeps C<MongoDB::WriteResult> as an empty
superclass for some backwards compatibility so that C<<
$result->isa("MongoDB::WriteResult") >> will continue to work as expected.

The attributes have been renamed to be consistent with the new CRUD API.
The legacy names are deprecated, but are available as aliases.

=head2 GridFS

The L<MongoDB::GridFS> class now has explicit read preference and write
concern attributes inherited from L<MongoDB::MongoClient> or
L<MongoDB::Database>, just like L<MongoDB::Collection>.  This means that
GridFS operations now default to an acknowledged write concern, just like
collection operations have been doing since v0.502.0 in 2012.

The use of C<safe> is deprecated.

Support for ancient, undocumented positional parameters circa 2010
has been removed.

=head2 Low-level functions removed

Low-level driver functions have been removed from the public API.

=head2 MongoDB::Connection removed

The C<MongoDB::Connection> module was deprecated in v0.502.0 and has been
removed.

=head2 BSON encoding changes

In the v1 driver, BSON encoding and decoding have been encapsulated into a
L<MongoDB::BSON> codec object.  This can be provided at any level, from 
L<MongoDB::MongoClient> to L<MongoDB::Collection>.  If not provided, a
default will be created that behaves similarly to the v0 encoding/decoding
functions, except for the following changes.

=head3 C<$MongoDB::BSON::use_binary> removed

Historically, this defaulted to false, which corrupts binary data when
round tripping.  Retrieving a binary data element and re-inserting it
would have resulted in a field with UTF-8 encoded string of binary data.

Going forward, binary data will be returned as a L<MongoDB::BSON::Binary>
object.  A future driver may add the ability to control decoding to allow
alternative representations.

=head3 C<$MongoDB::BSON::use_boolean> removed

This global variable never worked. BSON booleans were always deserialized
as L<boolean> objects.  A future driver may add the ability to control
boolean representation.

=head3 C<$MongoDB::BSON::utf8_flag_on> removed

In order to ensure round-tripping of string data, this variable is removed.
BSON strings will always be decoded to Perl character strings.  Anything
else risks double-encoding a round-trip.

=head3 C<$MongoDB::BSON::looks_like_number> and C<$MongoDB::BSON::char>
deprecated and re-scoped

In order to allow a future driver to provide more flexible user-customized
encoding and decoding, these global variables are deprecated.  If set, they
will be examined during C<< MongoDB::MongoClient->new() >> to set the
configuration of a default L<MongoDB::BSON> codec (if one is not
provided).  Changing them later will B<NOT> change the behavior of the
codec object.

=head3 C<MongoDB::MongoClient> option C<inflate_regexps> removed

Previously, BSON regular expressions decoded to C<qr{}> references by
default and the C<MongoDB::MongoClient> C<inflate_regexps> option was
available to decode instead to L<MongoDB::BSON::Regexp>s.

Going forward in the v1.0.0 driver, for safety and consistency with other
drivers, BSON regular expressions B<always> decode to
L<MongoDB::BSON::Regexp> objects.

=head3 C<MongoDB::MongoClient> option C<inflate_dbrefs> removed

The C<inflate_dbrefs> configuration option has been removed and replaced
with a C<dbref_callback> option in L<MongoDB::BSON>.

By default, the C<MongoDB::MongoClient> will create a L<MongoDB::BSON>
codec that will construct L<MongoDB::DBRef> objects.  This ensures that
DBRefs properly round-trip.  (N.B. DBRefs in Perl are
L<overly restrictive|https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/PERL-527>; this will
be addressed after the v1.0.0 release).

=head3 C<MongoDB::MongoClient> option C<dt_type> deprecated and changed to read-only

The C<dt_type> option is now only takes effect if C<MongoDB::MongoClient>
constructs a L<MongoDB::BSON> codec object.  It has been changed to a
read-only attribute so that any code that relied on changing C<dt_type>
after constructing a C<MongoDB::MongoClient> object will fail instead of
being silently ignored.

=head3 Int32 vs Int64 encoding changes

On 64-bit Perls, integers that fit in 32-bits will be encoded as BSON
Int32 (whereas previously these were always encoded as BSON Int64).

Math::BigInt objects will always be encoded as BSON Int64, which allows
users to force 64-bit encoding if desired.

=head3 Added support for Time::Moment

L<Time::Moment> is a much faster replacement for the venerable L<DateTime>
module.  The BSON codec will serialize L<Time::Moment> objects correctly
and can use that module as an argument for the C<dt_type> codec attribute.

=head1 DEPRECATED METHODS

Deprecated options and methods may be removed in a future release.  Their
documentation has been removed to discourage ongoing use.  Unless
otherwise stated, they will continue to behave as they previously did,
allowing a degree of backwards compatibility until code is updated to the
new MongoDB driver API.

=head2 MongoDB::Database

=for :list
* last_error — Errors are now indicated via exceptions at the time database
  commands are executed.

=head2 MongoDB::Collection

=for :list
* insert, batch_insert, remove, update, query and find_and_modify — A new
  common driver CRUD API replaces these legacy methods.
* get_collection — This method implied that collections could be contained
  inside collection.  This doesn't actually happen so it's confusing to
  have a Collection be a factory for collections.  Users who want nested
  namespaces should be explicit and create them off Database objects instead.
* ensure_index, drop_indexes, drop_index, get_index — A new
  L<MongoDB::IndexView> class is accessable through the C<indexes> method,
  offering greater consistency in behavior across drivers.

=head2 MongoDB::CommandResult

=for :list
* result — has been renamed to 'output' for clarity

=head2 MongoDB::Cursor

=for :list
* slave_ok — this modifier method is superseded by the 'read_preference'
  modifier method
* count — this is superseded by the L<MongoDB::Collection
  count/MongoDB::Collection#count> method.  Previously, this ignored
  skip/limit unless a true argument was passed, which was a bizarre,
  non-intuitive and inconsistent API.

=cut
